##Biology diversity
Instructed by [Prof. Wouter D. Hoff](http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Wouter_Hoff), Tuesday, April 9, 2015.


There are many aspects that embody biology diversity, such as:

- number of species
- bacterial diversity
- gene diversity
- length of the food chain

But **HOW** to define diversity?
  
Let's first consider animals. How to define animals? We could define animals with one kind of its characters, such as the way to move. Animals move with muscle+neuron+cell. However, it is different from jellyfish.

    Is jellyfish an animal? 

So we find that animals have diversity characters.

###Body plan

According to this, can we classify animals with their *shape* just like this?(This is **body plan**) 

- *tetrapod
- *"worms"
- *insects

Insects have crunchy shell and 6 legs, which satisfies this plan.

     Why insects are crunchy?

But what about snakes? Are snakes "worms"? 

More sadly, can we classify plants or even bacterial with **body plan**?

###Genome plan

The failure of body plan make us consider about genome.

> Genome=entire DNA sequence of an organism

We may study diversity at molecule level and compare their genome/DNA sequences. 

Let's consider this method:

- rice genomes   ~10^9 bp(base pair, 碱基对)
- bacterial(typically E. Coli, 大肠杆菌) genomes ~10^6 bp

The huge diversity between their bps raise a question:    

    How to compare their sequences?

Maybe we can compare their DNA to encode "similar" proteins. According to *"back of the envelope" calculation*, 

> *"Back of the envelope" calculation*： 

> one AA(Amino Acid, 氨基酸) is encoded by 3 bp, and consider the [promoter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promoter_(genetics))(启动子) and terminator(终止子), one AA ~4 bp.

> For example: a typical protein has 250 AA, corresponding to 250*4=1000bp


we find E.Coli has ~5000 proteins. Human has 10^9 bp (10^3 times larger than E.Coli) but only 30,000(6 times of E.Coli). It is interesting!

    We have too many junk DNA?



###Compare *similar* genes/proteins

Let's compare *"similar"* genes/proteins to judge if them have:

- same function
- similar sequence/structure
- *same ancestor*

> We call proteins with same ancestor *"Homologous" protein*

Up to now, we have notice that we can define/compare *biology diversity* through *sequence diversity*. We won't warry about the shape of different species. 


---